README.md, before:

# Span Queries: the SQL for GenAI

:rocket: [Playground](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cloud-computer/spnl/?qv=false) **|** [Research Poster](./docs/poster-20250529.pdf) **|** [About Span Queries](./docs/about.md) **|** [Contribute](./docs/dev.md)

What if we had a **SQL for GenAI**? Span Queries provide a declarative
query foundation for writing scale-up and scale-out interactions with
large language models (LLMs).  A span query allows messages to be
arranged into a [map/reduce](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MapReduce)
tree of generation calls. When LLM calls are arranged in this way into
bulk (multi-generation) queries, they can be *planned* so as to:

- improve the quality of generated output, because map/reduce is an inference scaling technique
- increase the efficacy of attention mechanisms and KV cache locality, because the query expresses data dependencies
- allow for lightweight clients with server-managed data, because the queries express data access in a declarative way that can be managed server-side

[Learn more](./docs/about.md) about span queries.

**Examples** [Judge/generator](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cloud-computer/spnl/?demo=email&qv=true) **|** [Judge/generator (optimized)](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cloud-computer/spnl/?demo=email2&qv=true) **|** [Policy-driven email generation](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cloud-computer/spnl/?demo=email3&qv=true)

## Getting Started

The span query system is written in
[Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/). Thus, step 1 is to [configure your
environment](./https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for Rust, if
you haven't already. Step 2 is to clone this repository. 

Using these pre-requisities, we have a quick and dirty CLI on top of
the core capabilities to help with tire kicking. Using it, you can run
a quick demo with:

```shell
cargo run
```

The full usage is provided via `cargo run -- --help`, which also
specifies the available demos.

```
Usage: spnl [OPTIONS] [FILE]

Arguments:
  [FILE]  File to process

Options:
  -d, --demo <DEMO>
          Demo to run [possible values: chat, email, email2, email3, sweagent, gsm8k, rag]
  -m, --model <MODEL>
          Generative Model [default: ollama/granite3.2:2b]
  -e, --embedding-model <EMBEDDING_MODEL>
          Embedding Model [default: ollama/mxbai-embed-large:335m]
  -t, --temperature <TEMPERATURE>
          Temperature [default: 0.5]
  -l, --max-tokens <MAX_TOKENS>
          Max Completion/Generated Tokens [default: 100]
  -n, --n <N>
          Number of candidates to consider [default: 5]
  -k, --chunk-size <CHUNK_SIZE>
          Chunk size [default: 1]
      --vecdb-uri <VECDB_URI>
          Vector DB Url [default: data/spnl]
  -s, --show-query
          Re-emit the compiled query
  -v, --verbose
          Verbose output
  -h, --help
          Print help
  -V, --version
          Print version
```

Commit message:

doc: expand on the planning topic a bit
Signed-off-by: Nick Mitchell <nickm@us.ibm.com>

README.md, after:

# Span Queries: the SQL for GenAI

:rocket: [Playground](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cloud-computer/spnl/?qv=false) **|** [Research Poster](./docs/poster-20250529.pdf) **|** [About Span Queries](./docs/about.md) **|** [Contribute](./docs/dev.md)

What if we had a **SQL for GenAI**? Span Queries provide a declarative
query foundation for writing scale-up and scale-out interactions with
large language models (LLMs).  A span query allows messages to be
arranged into a [map/reduce](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MapReduce)
tree of generation calls. When LLM calls are arranged in this way into
bulk (multi-generation) queries. 

[Learn more](./docs/about.md) about span queries.

## Query Planning

A span query is declarative and expresses multi-generation
interactions with a model server. This design was chosen to make span
queries amenable to *planning*. This is conceptual at this point, but
we see some interesting possibilities:

- improve the quality of generated output, because map/reduce is an inference scaling technique
- increase the efficacy of attention mechanisms and KV cache locality, because the query expresses data dependencies
- allow for lightweight clients with server-managed data, because the queries express data access in a declarative way that can be managed server-side

Some progress has been made on the first point (map/reduce). See
[./haystack](the haystack experiments) for some evidence of how
map/reduce can be an inference scaling technique. However, it is as of
yet unclear what "correctness preserving" even means in the stochastic
world of LLM. Therefore deep challenges still remain.

We also have some initial experiments on the second point, via
interlinkage with [vLLM](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm). Stay
tuned for more details.

**Examples** [Judge/generator](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cloud-computer/spnl/?demo=email&qv=true) **|** [Judge/generator (optimized)](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cloud-computer/spnl/?demo=email2&qv=true) **|** [Policy-driven email generation](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cloud-computer/spnl/?demo=email3&qv=true)

## Getting Started

The span query system is written in
[Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/). Thus, step 1 is to [configure your
environment](./https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for Rust, if
you haven't already. Step 2 is to clone this repository. 

Using these pre-requisities, we have a quick and dirty CLI on top of
the core capabilities to help with tire kicking. Using it, you can run
a quick demo with:

```shell
cargo run
```

The full usage is provided via `cargo run -- --help`, which also
specifies the available demos.

```
Usage: spnl [OPTIONS] [FILE]

Arguments:
  [FILE]  File to process

Options:
  -d, --demo <DEMO>
          Demo to run [possible values: chat, email, email2, email3, sweagent, gsm8k, rag]
  -m, --model <MODEL>
          Generative Model [default: ollama/granite3.2:2b]
  -e, --embedding-model <EMBEDDING_MODEL>
          Embedding Model [default: ollama/mxbai-embed-large:335m]
  -t, --temperature <TEMPERATURE>
          Temperature [default: 0.5]
  -l, --max-tokens <MAX_TOKENS>
          Max Completion/Generated Tokens [default: 100]
  -n, --n <N>
          Number of candidates to consider [default: 5]
  -k, --chunk-size <CHUNK_SIZE>
          Chunk size [default: 1]
      --vecdb-uri <VECDB_URI>
          Vector DB Url [default: data/spnl]
  -s, --show-query
          Re-emit the compiled query
  -v, --verbose
          Verbose output
  -h, --help
          Print help
  -V, --version
          Print version
```
